** The Four Soulquarians Records

I don't want to talk specifically what the Soulquarians are/were, as I'm
sure I'll leave something out / don't know all the facts / etc.  Briefly
(and in my probably at least slightly misremembered recall of facts that
weren't right in the first place), the Soulquarians were a loose
conglomeration of musicians and producers that coalesced at Electric
Lady Studios (NYC; the studio Jimi Hendrix built) in 1997-99 around the
recording of records by The Roots, Common, Erykah Badu, and D'Angelo.
The people involved knew each other prior to that time period (I think).
I'm not sure if the recording of those records in the same time at the
same place was planned or just happened.  Probably some of each.  The
Soulquarians are J Dilla (aka, Jay Dee; aka James Yancey), Questlove
(aka Ahmir Thompson), James Poyser, and D'Angelo.

(Wikipedia (I had to look...) also says Badu, Common, Pino Palladino (a
sick Welsh bass player), Bilal, Q-Tip, Mos Def, and Talib Kweli are
"Soulquarians", but...)

The *thing* about the Soulquarians (meaning the original four) is that
they're all Aquarians.  And of course Aquarians are special.  Anyway, I
don't want to talk about the zodiac, either.  I want to ramble about the
four albums that came out of that specific period:

- D'Angelo: "Voodoo"
- The Roots: "Things Fall Apart"
- Common: "Like Water for Chocolate"
- Erykah Badu: "Mama's Gun"

* The Vinyl Picture

*What* was going on in the late 90s/2000??  (The records were all issued
in 1999/2000.)  Records were NOT coming out on vinyl the way they had
been several years prior (or the way the are now; now's a good time for
people who like records -- don't take it for granted).

- Voodoo:

Voodoo on vinyl was super rare until it was reissued by Light in the
Attic in 2013(?).  I think even the CD has been difficult to find at
times.  Maybe the record label was going through problems at the time.
(But the record sold a lot -- didn't it? -- so the CDs must be out
there?)

There are a number of 12"s from the record, and also a "For DJs Only"
EP/12" with three of the best songs on the album plus their
instrumentals.  Light in the Attic missed a bet by not also reissuing
that EP.  The cover is memorable.  The 12"s (and to a lesser extent the
EP) are much easier to find than the (original Virgin) album.  The
reissue is still around (for now...).

- Things Fall Apart:

Issued in a generic sleeve, which wasn't around very long.  I think I've
seen it once or twice, but for some reason never bought it (probably
"overpriced" when I saw it).  There is at least one great 12" ("The Next
Movement" I think?).  The album was reissued for Record Store Day in
2013 and still seems available now (Feb. 2014).

- Like Water for Chocolate:

The most common (ha ha) on vinyl and had many, maaany 12"s issued as
well.  It's not too hard to find on vinyl, and also the instrumental
album is not hard to find (if that's your thing).  I'm not sure if
they're real or bootlegs when you find them, but... whatever.  I don't
think this has been reissued.  A reissue doesn't seem necessary (because
it's not hard to find -- not because it doesn't "deserve" it).

- Mama's Gun:

Only had weird promo-seeming versions issued.  The whole album on 2xLP
in a plain sleeve (red vinyl; the "cheap" kind of red vinyl though...),
an album sampler (6 tracks?  Or 3 tracks plus instrumentals?) also in a
plain sleeve.  My impression is that the red vinyl album is pretty
difficult to find.  Actually, any vinyl of Mama's Gun seems difficult to
find.  It is ripe for a reissue.

* Back to the Program...

Besides the four albums sharing a similar-ish sound/vibe/feel (not that
they're interchangeable... I don't really want to get into "reviews" of
each), one of the main things they have in common that sticks out to me
is: they are LONG records.  Were all records long at that time?  (I
haven't tried to check.)  They're all 70+ minutes long.  I don't like
super long records in general.  It's often exhausting to listen to them.
Not in these specific cases necessarily, but in general.  With the
exception of Voodoo (which is the longest of the four if I'm not
mistaken) none of these records are "100%" listens.  Even Voodoo
stumbles in one spot (in a minor way, for me).  So the duration is a
little bit of an issue.

(About long records, though... one of my current "everyday" listens is
the 80 Blocks from Tiffanys Mixtape Part 2.  That's Pete Rock + Camp Lo.
Came out in 2013 (if "came out" can mean "was available for free
download).  It's 75 minutes long.  It should feel waaay too long, but...
Pete Rock, what can I say?  I can't get enough.  But that's a subject
for another day.)

(About 100% records: Not being a 100% record is not a severe criticism.
Most great records aren't 100% records.  To be fantastic a record
doesn't have to be 100% good.  100% records are rare.  And of course
highly subjective.  Roy Ayers "Mystic Voyage" is example of a 100%
record.  There are different ways to be "100%", though.  Probably a
subject for another day.)

Come to think of it, maybe the *songs* are long.  (I'm thinking while
I'm writing.  Also, I've never been guilty of writing songs that are way
too long so I wouldn't know anything about that.)

Let's see (yes, I do have all the CDs):

- Voodoo: 79min / 13 tracks (just over 6min average)
- Things Fall Apart: 70min / 18 tracks (under 4min average)
- Like Water for Chocolate: 78min / 16 tracks (under 5min average)
- Mama's Gun: 72min / 14 tracks (just over 5min average)

So it's a varying combination of longish songs and a lot of them.  But
not SUPER long songs (on average) and not WAY too many songs total.  The
Roots album might have about 6 minutes of silence ("hiding" a hidden
track) so that would push their actual average song time down.

Anyway...

* J Dilla's Influence

I should have said earlier that Questlove is the key thread running
through all four albums.  He produces and/or executive produces and/or
plays drums on all this stuff, along with also having songwriting
credits.  He's all over it.

If you had to say who the mastermind of Soulquarians is, it's probably
Questlove.  And the heart and soul is Dilla.  James Poyser is the wizard
in the shadows.  D'Angelo... the spirit and the troubled genius that
ties it all together?

But it's Dilla's influence that's most interesting to me...

- Mama's Gun:

Dilla has production credits on three songs (I thought it was only one,
but I checked...).  One of them is, to me and to many (I think?), one of
the premier Dilla productions, "Didn't Cha Know".  Which I think is
mostly a straight loop, not a chop?  (Yes: DJ Dez on "Didn't Cha Know":
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1qs7euZbj8.  The original:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDBIvE9J4xk)

- Things Fall Apart:

He produced only one song ("Dynamite!"), but The Roots don't generally
have outside producers on their albums (do they?), so that says
something.  (Scott Storch produces a couple songs on the album, but he's
an ex-Roots member, so...).  Questlove is on record as saying that
Dilla's fingerprints are all over Things Fall Apart -- Dilla flipped
Questlove's wig on how the drums could be played.  And Questlove
acknowledges his debt to Dilla over & over.  No secret about that.

- Voodoo:

Dilla has no credits on the album, but this is an interesting read about
his influence on the album (interesting: yes; accurate? who knows):
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voodoo_(D%27Angelo_album)#Production

I have to say: Pino Palladino's bass playing on Voodoo captures what I
think of as THE sound of the Soulquarians, and simultaneously is what I
think of as the essence of Dilla's style in this period.  The loose,
"off" feel of the bass playing is so great (and just screams "Dilla", to
me -- right or wrong).  That's funny because Wikipedia just told me that
D'Angelo wrote all the bass lines and had Palladino "learn and improvise
the bass arrangements" (whatever that means).  So... who knows.

- Like Water for Chocolate:

Dilla produced (or co-produced) most of the record (11 of 16 tracks).
And he also MCs on a couple songs??  So this is where he gets the
most explicit credit of the four records.  At the time he was also
signed to MCA (Common's label, but also The Roots' label at the time;
Voodoo is on Virgin & Mama's Gun is on Motown).  His production on LWFC
is (of course) great.  "Dooinit", "A Film Called (Pimp)", "Payback Is a
Grandmother", and "Thelonius" (which is also a Slum Village song...) are
canonical examples of Dilla's production style in this era of his work.
Cold, cold tracks.

* Back to the Program...

I'd also like to mention: these artists seem to have discovered Fela
Kuti right around this time (along with a lot of the rest of the world,
me included).  At the very least, this is when they brought the
influence to the forefront.  Not much (if any?) explicit Fela influence
on Voodoo or Mama's Gun, but there are homages to Fela on the Roots &
Common albums.  That's not a criticism, it's an observation.  Fela was
really "in the air" in the mid-to-late 90s, so it's not surprising.  The
first "modern" Tony Allen record came out during the Soulquarian period
("Black Voices", which is sampled on Common's record... I think?) and
Fela's catalog was seeing a massive organized reissue for the first (but
not last!) time.  Was it Afrobeat rennaissance number one?  Or number
the second?

* In conclusion...

No conclusions were reached.  I like these four records and I like
thinking about the connections between them.  The artists involved are
individually and collectively interesting to me.  I'm a fan of their
work before and since the period under discussion.

In the spirit of... full disclosure?  (The Spirit of Doo-Doo?)  To put
all this in context with my history with these records, I was aware of
all of them except Mama's Gun when they came out.  I was playing music
on tour in Europe right after Things Fall Apart came out, and we played
that tape to death.  I've at times felt burnt out on Things Fall Apart;
that's how much I've listened to it.  Voodoo was also in heavy rotation
and I've listened to it more times than I can count (it's less prone to
causing burn out for me, for whatever reason).  Like Water for Chocolate
I don't have distinct memories of, but I had it and have listened to it
regularly since it came out.

For whatever reason I was not familiar with Mama's Gun until the last
few years (except for the song "Didn't Cha Know" -- there's a CD single
of that song, which I found at some point).  I have no good reason for
that.  Because of that, I've not been able to get into it to the extent
of the other three.  I'm working on it, but you know -- a lot of music
appreciation (for me, at least) is based on when/where/how you first
hear something, and maybe I'm too late on Mama's Gun.  That ship may
have sailed.  But I'll keep trying.

I'm sure I've made some factual errors in all this, and I'm sure not
everyone agrees with my assessments (or I should say, I sure hope not
everyone agrees!).  So yeah, I don't know...
